# The Lexer

The goal of the lexer is to take the source code and identify tokens.

## Identify Tokens

Example code we will tokenize:

```javascript
// variables
let five = 5;
let ten = 10;

// functions
let add = fn(x, y) {
	x + y;
};

// setting function output to a variable
let result = add(five, ten);
```

```nix
# variables
five = 5
ten = 10

# functions
add = x: y: x + y

# setting function output to a variable
result five ten
```

```powershell
# psd files do not allow for invoking functions, it just contains data
# PSD1, tokens can have quotes and not have quotes
@{
	five = 5;
	ten = 10;
}
```

### Breaking down the problem

In the 1st example, we have numbers:
- 5
- 10

Variable Names
- x
- y
- add
- result

Other words
- let
- function

Special Characters
- (, ), {, }, =, ;.

### Approach ... Categories

Numbers are just integers so we can treat them as such.  They can have a seperate type.

We don't care if it is 5 or a 10... only that it is a number.

Variable names we will call identifiers.

`let` and `function` are key words used during the parsing phase.

Special Characters are the last category.

### Token data structure.

```go
const (
	ILLEGAL = "ILLEGAL"
	EOF     = "EOF"

	// Identifiers + literals
	IDENT = "IDENT" // add, foobar, x, y, ...
	INT   = "INT"   // 1343456

	// Operators
	ASSIGN = "="
	PLUS   = "+"

	// Delimiters
	COMMA     = ","
	SEMICOLON = ";"

	LPAREN = "("
	RPAREN = ")"
	LBRACE = "{"
	RBRACE = "}"

	// Keywords
	FUNCTION = "FUNCTION"
	LET      = "LET"
)
```

## Understanding the Lexer

The lexer will take the source code as input and return a list of tokens that represents the source code.  It should go through its input and output the next token it recognizes.

We can minimize memory usage by implementing a method called NextToken(), which will output the next token.  This means we can initilaize the lexer with our source code and then call NextToken() to get the next token.

### Using two pointers

Need to go back and look at this after I've done some code.

The lexer struct contains the fields needed for the lexer to be able to read the input.

`position` and `readPosition` are integers used to keep track of the current position of the lexer so that it can return the next token.

*Position* is the current position of the lexer in the input.
*ReadPosition* is the next position of the lexer in the input.